Ransomware is a type of malware threat actors use to infect computers and encrypt computer files until a
ransom is paid. (See Protecting Against Malicious Code for more information on malware.) Aer the initial
infection, ransomware will attempt to spread to connected systems, including shared storage drives and
other accessible computers.
If the threat actor’s ransom demands are not met (i.e., if the victim does not pay the ransom), the files or
encrypted data will usually remain encrypted and unavailable to the victim. Even are a ransom has been
paid to unlock encrypted files, threat actors will sometimes demand additional payments, delete a victim’s
data, refuse to decrypt the data, or decline to provide a working decryption key to restore the victim’s
access. The Federal Government does not support paying ransomware demands.
Ransomware identifies the drives on an infected system and begins to encrypt the files within each drive.
Ransomware generally adds an extension to the encrypted files to show that the files have
been encrypted—the file extension used is unique to the ransomware type.
Once the ransomware has completed file encryption, it creates and displays a file or files containing
instructions on how the victim can pay the ransom. If the victim pays the ransom, the threat actor may
provide a cryptographic key that the victim can use to unlock the files, making them accessible.

Ransomware is commonly delivered through phishing emails or via “drive-by downloads.” Phishing emails
one appear as though they have been sent from a legitimate organization or someone known to the
victim and entice the user to click on a malicious link or open a malicious attachment. A “drive-by
download” is a program that is automatically downloaded from the internet without the user’s consent or
or without their knowledge. It is possible the malicious code may run are download, without user
interaction. Aer the malicious code has been run, the computer becomes infected with ransomware.
Back up your computer. Perform frequent backups of your system and other important files, and verify
your backups regularly. If your computer becomes infected with ransomware, you can restore your
system to its previous state using your backups.
Store your backups separately. Best practice is to store your backups on a separate device that cannot
be accessed from a network, such as on an external hard drive. Once the backup is completed, make
sure to disconnect the external hard drive, or separate device from the network or computer.
Train your organization. Organizations should ensure that they provide cybersecurity awareness
training to their personnel. Ideally, organizations will have regular, mandatory cybersecurity awareness
training sessions to ensure their personnel are informed about current cybersecurity threats and threat
actor techniques. To improve workforce awareness, organizations can test their personnel with
phishing assessments that simulate real-world phishing emails.
Update and patch your computer. Ensure your applications and operating systems (OSs) have been
updated with the latest patches. Vulnerable applications and OSs are the target of most ransomware
attacks. 
Use caution with links and when entering website addresses. Be careful when clicking directly on links
in emails, even if the sender appears to be someone you know. Attempt to independently verify website
addresses (e.g., contact your organization's helpdesk, search the internet for the sender organization’s
website or the topic mentioned in the email). Pay attention to the website addresses you click on, as
well as those you enter yourself. Malicious website addresses one appear almost identical to
legitimate sites, open using a slight variation in spelling or a different domain.
Open email attachments with caution. Be wary of opening email attachments, even from senders you
think you know, particularly when attachments are compressed files or ZIP files.
Keep your personal information safe. Check a website’s security to ensure the information you submit
is encrypted before you provide it. Verify email senders. If you are unsure whether or not an email is legitimate, try to verify the email’s
legitimacy by contacting the sender directly. Do not click on any links in the email. If possible, use a
previous (legitimate) email to ensure the contact information you have for the sender is authentic
before you contact them.
Inform yourself. Keep yourself informed about recent cybersecurity threats and up to date on
ransomware techniques. You can find information about known phishing attacks on the Anti-Phishing
Working Group website. You may also want to sign up for CISA product notifications, which will alert
you when a new Alert, Analysis Report, Bulletin, Current Activity, or Tip has been published.
Use and maintain preventative software programs. Install antivirus software, firewalls, and email filters
—and keep them updated—to reduce malicious network traffic.
Isolate the infected system. Remove the infected system from all networks, and disable the computer’s
wireless, Bluetooth, and any other potential networking capabilities. Ensure all shared and networked
drives are disconnected whether wired or wireless.
Turn o other computers and devices. Power-o and segregate (i.e., remove from the network) the
infected computer. Power-o and segregate any other computers or devices that shared a network
with the infected computer that have not been fully encrypted by ransomware. If possible, collect
and secure all infected and potentially infected computers and devices in a central location, making
sure to clearly label any computers that have been encrypted. Powering-o and segregating infected
computers and computers that have not been fully encrypted may allow for the recovery of partially
encrypted files by specialists. Secure your backups. Ensure that your backup data is online and secure. If possible, scan your backup
data with an antivirus program to check that it is free of malware.
Home users: immediately contact your local FBI office or local U.S. Secret Service office to request
assistance.
Organizations: immediately report ransomware incidents to your IT helpdesk or security office.
All users: change all system passwords once the ransomware has been removed. You can submit
ransomware files to CISA for analysis
What is encryption?
In very basic terms, encryption is a way to send a message in code. The only person who can decode the
message is the person with the correct key; to anyone else, the message looks like a random series of
letters, numbers, and characters.
Encryption is especially important if you are trying to send sensitive information that other people should
not be able to access. Because email messages are sent over the internet and might be intercepted by an
attacker, it is important to add an additional layer of security to sensitive information
Encrypting data is a good way to protect sensitive information. It ensures that the data can only be read by the person who is authorized
to have access to it.
How is it different from digital signatures?
Like digital signatures, public-key encryption utilizes software such as PGP, converts information with
mathematical algorithms, and relies on public and private keys, but there are differences:
The purpose of encryption is confidentiality—concealing the content of the message by translating it
into a code. The purpose of digital signatures is integrity and authenticity—verifying the sender of a
message and indicating that the content has not been changed. Although encryption and digital
signatures can be used independently, you can also sign an encrypted message.
When you sign a message, you use your private key, and anybody who has your public key can verify
that the signature is valid (see Understanding Digital Signatures for more information). When you
encrypt a message, you use the public key for the person you're sending it to, and his or her private key
is used to decrypt the message. Because people should keep their private keys confidential and should
protect them with passwords, the intended recipient should be the only one who is able to view the
information.
How does encryption work?
Obtain the public key for the person you want to be able to read the information. If you get the key from
a public key ring, contact the person directly to confirm that the series of letters and numbers
associated with the key is the correct fingerprint.
 Encrypt the email message using their public key. Most email clients have 
When the person receives the message, he or she will be able to decrypt it.
